---
title: Transition to Astro
publishDate: 2023-04-08
---

Hey there! So, my website has been running on
[VuePress](https://vuepress.vuejs.org/) (v1) since the beginning. It's been
pretty good, but let's face it, it had some shortcomings. VuePress websites are
Single Page Apps (SPAs), which means there's a lot of JavaScript involved.
That's fine for interactive sites, but for a content-focused website like this
one, it's not ideal. That's where [Astro](https://astro.build) comes in, a
framework that puts performance first.

I'd been keeping an eye on Astro for a while, and when it reached version 2, I
thought it was the perfect time to switch this website from VuePress to Astro.
The transition went smoothly, and here's a quick overview of what I had to
tackle:

Building core components: Astro doesn't come with built-in features like
navbars, sidebars, or tip boxes, which VuePress does. So, I rolled up my sleeves
and created them myself.

Code syntax highlighting: VuePress has a nice out-of-the-box syntax highlighting
configuration, while Astro provides only the default code syntax coloring. To
get specific line highlighting, I had to craft a custom component.

Recreating the theme: My site's theme used to be coded into VuePress,
intertwined with its default theme. Switching to Astro gave me the chance to
clean things up, and now I'm in the process of transitioning it to Tailwind CSS.

One of Astro's coolest features is [Content
Collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/). It lets
you organize content by splitting it into different types (for me, it's
"articles" and "posts" like this one). Each type can have its own
TypeScript-typed metadata, making it easy to fetch content along with its
metadata and work with it in various ways. This feature came in handy when
building components like the Sidebar.

To wrap it up, Astro is pretty awesome for static websites that focus on
content. If that's what you're looking to create, I'd definitely recommend
giving Astro a try.